# Report Misogyny in Tech!

Misogyny in tech is a huge issue for women. I've created this as a
safe space to track incidents in whatever way they feel
comfortable. If you'd like to be anonymous, simply create a new GitHub
handle. This project is based on a recent blog post that I wrote based
on Kate Manne's book on misogyny in the framework of moral philosophy
and my own experiences. Please feel free to create tags for issues
that you've experienced and this blog post is helping you recognize.

## The Moral Implications of Being a Moderately Successful Computer Scientist and Woman

I recently reached a few high points in my career that coincided, not
coincidentally, with some of the worst harassment of my life. It made
me reflect on how my career has been defined as much in terms of
misogyny as technical excellence (I've garnered quite a CV in both),
and how I have struggled to explain to others my experience.  This
blog post builds on previous work, like [Kathryn McKinley's seminal
post](https://www.sigarch.org/what-happens-to-us-does-not-happen-to-most-of-you/)
[1]
and on Kate Manne's books [Down
Girl](http://www.katemanne.net/down-girl.html) [2] and
[Entitled](http://www.katemanne.net/entitled.html) [3], which frame
misogyny through the lens of moral philosophy.

Kate defines misogyny as the enforcement branch of the patriarchy.
While sexism is a set of beliefs, misogyny is a set of actions. As
such, it is much more damaging to women. Worse, misogyny enforces a
patriarchical worldview that *the majority of the world holds as the
morally correct one*. Thus, when women break this norm (i.e., by
demanding authority, recognition, space and not providing goods that
men feel entitled to like domestic, emotional and mental labor), they
are *in the wrong*. The men are seen as the victims, while the women
enduring the misogyny are the bad actors. This viewpoint leads to
justification of a number of vile behaviors perpetuated by men -- even
those men that claim to support and love women.

It is difficult to even discuss these issues because both sides are not
using the same framework of what is acceptable "moral" behavior and
what is not. Just like in [distributed
systems](https://irenezhang.net/blog/2016/01/11/consistency.html), we
can't make progress on this topic when there is disagreement on the
underlying system model.  These beliefs are so deeply held that,
consciously or not, when people meet someone who challenges their
beliefs, the cognitive dissonance can cause them to do something truly
harmful.  For example, my very *existence* as a moderately young,
moderately successful computer scientist threatens some men's sense of
identity, thus making them uncomfortable and/or lash out. But if a
successful woman in computer science makes men in our community
uncomfortable, then we are not likely to have too many successful
women in the community.

In this blog post, I will attempt to describe the system within which
I exist as a moderately successful computer scientist and woman. I
will highlight the fallacies that lead to women (1) leaving tech, (2)
generally being anxious in our society, and (3) experiencing horrific
harassment and misogyny.

### Moral Fallacy #1: Woman != Programmer

Before women even write a single line of code, they are already at a
disadvantage: when I was 6 years old, no one would look at my pigtails
and white Mary Janes and predict that I would grow up to be one of the
top operating systems researchers in the world.  However, this exact
prediction was so comically common for white men at MIT that my
husband and I joked that we should sell a line of neonatal audio books
on Paxos.

Of course, this prediction continues even while I *am* one of the top
operating systems researchers in the world.  If only I got a penny for
every time someone said: you don't *look* like a computer scientist, I
could be Mackenzie Scott without having to marry an asshole.  This
comment is usually posed as a compliment, which I should graciously receive.

But it's not a compliment. I don't look like myself? I'm not a
computer scientist? This mental dissonance is jarring. It feels like
someone keeps slapping me *at work* and saying: Wake up, this was all 
a dream, you didn't actually publish any SOSP papers this year!

After enough people question your ability to do *your own job* based
on something as nonsensical as how you look, you really start to
question your own sanity.  When you are expected to *thank people for
the privilege*, you know you've entered the Twilight Zone.

Not only is this setting absolutely bonkers for women working in tech,
it has even worse implications when it comes to harassment. If we
penalize a man for harassing a woman in computer science, we're told we
are "ruining his life", but if a woman leaves because of harassment,
she just "couldn't cut it." Why? This view assumes a moral framework
where men are *entitled* to a career as a computer scientist or
professor, while women are generously being allowed the same thing,
which can be taken away at any time.

## Moral Fallacy #2: Woman != Experts

As anyone who's read Entitled -- or ever used the Internet -- knows,
some men love to be experts. Men were born to pontificate, and women
to listen. Not surprisingly, I have run into an excess of this kind of
man. If you want an entertaining description of this experience, read
Men Explain Things to Me.

What happens when a woman is an expert and a man is not? -- a
situation that I find myself in frequently.  Then misogyny steps in to
enforce what the men perceive to be the societal (and moral) norms.
Not only do I have the gall to not look like a computer scientist, I
have the gall to actually be better at it than them.  This is
obviously completely unacceptable and my fault.

Now imagine what happens to the average woman professor who must stand
up every day and perform this act in the insane asylum.  If any of
them last long enough to inspire other women to join the field, they
(the women professors and students) are rapidly disabused of this idea
by the men in the classes that they teach.  Yes, even professors find
themselves harassed by their students.  For example, in a recent
discussion with a faculty friend, she mentioned that she has received
numerous reviews that her voice is too high pitched.  A physical trait
that she has no control over and no impact on her teaching abilities
is somehow a point of criticism.  And this despite the fact that these
professors *quite literally have control over these men's careers*!
The view that women can't be experts is so strongly held that it causes
some men to repeatedly harass the person attempting to teach them the 
things that they need to succeed.

## Moral Fallacy #3: Woman == Good Feelings

Now that I have managed to make men feel embarrassed and insecure,
they blame these feelings on me. No one else has made them feel this
way before, and because men are famously good at emotional
self-regulation, *I* must be the problem.  Indeed, one of the things
that women are responsible for in our patriarchical society is
[managing men's
emotions](https://medium.com/fearless-she-wrote/i-am-not-responsible-for-the-anger-of-men-eabf35161886)
[4].

While men *claim* to be unemotionally seeking scientific truth in
research, I have never seen a woman so personally invested and
*emotional* about a research idea. Perhaps because women are not
allowed to use "top computer scientist" as their entire identity since
birth, we are better able to separate our research ideas from
ourselves and coldly discuss their pros and cons.  Or perhaps a
lifetime of being told that it is our job to regulate our own emotions
as well as those of the men around us has trained us to do pure
science without messy emotions. But of course women are hysterical,
and men are just passionate.

Since men do not know how to process these emotions, they lash out at
the women that caused them. The women are the ones committing the
wrong in their moral framework, so therefore they deserve to be
punished. This punishment can range from refusing to speak to the
woman -- which is a really mature reaction -- to actively harassing her.

## Moral Fallacy #4: Women == Love

Many of the men that I interact with have been raised by wonderful
mothers that taught them to be supportive husbands, and some of them
even have daughters that taught them that my plight is real.  However,
as the Entitled book notes: many men have been and feel that they have
a right to be adored by the women in their lives.  It sounds
ridiculous, but I am not their mother or daughter, and I do not owe
them anything. However, since so many men *only* interact with women
in this way, perhaps it isn't surprising that they mistake me for one
of these roles.  In our society, men are generally not friends with
women (unless they have been friend-zoned and worthy of pity), so the
only models that men have for how to interact with women come from
experiences with their mothers, wives and daughters.

Of course, the most pernicious form of these feelings is sexual
harassment, when men expect women in a work setting to be open to
romantic overtures of various forms, ranging from crushes to asking
out on dates and even to stalking.  I have always been perplexed by
this situation because I do not see my workplace as a dating pool.
But worse than this, because the only experiences that many men have
for interacting with women is with family, they expect *unconditional*
love or admiration and women must act *flattered* to receive it.  

For the women, this situation is worse than insane. It would be like a
random person on the street saying that they are part of your family
and going home with you.  But when you do not give them the love or
respect that they think they innately deserve, the men will feel
rejected and lash out.  It may even trigger a feeling of rejection
that they have had with family members, but I'm not a Freudian
therapist, so I shouldn't have to unpack that.

## Moral Fallacy #5: Women != Power

It is not for nothing that computer science as a field shapes our
world today. All of our titans of industry are computer scientists and
none of them are women. In fact, the women that contributed to their
success, like Melinda Gates, must be dismissed in service to
constructing a myth and religion around these men.  As long as
computer science retains prestige, men will feel entitled to it and
women not. There has been mountains written about this phenomena (and
how women are only allowed to succeed in perceived lower prestige
parts of the field).

One of the issues with not being allowed to seek power is that there
are very few ways to protect yourself as a woman. I have spent the
last couple years working on codes of conduct to prevent harassment.
The most common question asked is whether we were using our power to
punish men unfairly. Note that these are men who are actively
harassing women with multiple incidents reported. And yet, people are
still saying that these men are entitled to be in that space because
it makes *them* uncomfortable when women are actively trying to take
away men's power and privilege.

Of course, the other side of the coin here is that as I get more
senior, I experience more frequent and even worse harassment. As a
relatively well-connected and successful member of our research
community, I have various ways to deal with this harassment, but I
shouldn't have to spend so much of my time and energy on it.  Even
worse, I am now pulled into other situations where harassment is
present because I am expected, as a senior member of the
community, to help deal with these incidents. And of course, these
episodes are increasingly becoming worse as I advance in my career--
they inherently must reach horrible levels of severity to require my 
involvement. So even gaining power as a woman comes with a traumatic cost.

## Conclusion

Being a woman in tech is insane. We do not work in the same
moral system model as most of the people that we interact with daily
and we can't talk about it, because when we do, we are the ones
portrayed as crazy or hysterical.  In situations where we assume that
people will behave in rational ways (e.g., when codes of conduct are
not needed because we "trust" everyone), the default is simply to
reinforce the patriarchy.

Men, do better! If you are in a position of power and want to be an
ally, educate yourself by reading Entitled [3] and doing [training on
inclusive
governance](https://github.com/microsoft/OSPO/tree/main/learning_resources/2022-code-of-conduct-workshop)
[5].
Even if you think you are a nice guy, there are plenty of other guys
out there that are not so nice and dealing with the aftermath is much
worse than preventing the harassment in the first place.

## References

1. [What Happens To Us Does Not Happen To Most of
   You](https://www.google.com/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=kathryn+mckinley+what+happens+to+you&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8).
   Kathryn S. McKinley. February 2018.
2. [Down Girl: The Logic of
   Misogyn](http://www.katemanne.net/down-girl.html). Kate Manne. 2018.
3. [Entitled: How Male Privilege Hurts
   Women](http://www.katemanne.net/entitled.html). Kate Manne. August
   2020.
4. [I Am Not Responsible for the Anger of Men](https://medium.com/fearless-she-wrote/i-am-not-responsible-for-the-anger-of-men-eabf35161886). Caitlin
   Knudsen. June 2019
5. [Inclusive Governance: Codes of Conduct
   Workshop](https://github.com/microsoft/OSPO/tree/main/learning_resources/2022-code-of-conduct-workshop). Emma
   Irwin. 2022.

## Acknowledgments

I'd like to thank the women of the UW Syslab for their feedback, Simon
Peter and Dan Ports.

